SEP-2575: Make MCP Stateless (#2575)
modelcontextprotocol/modelcontextprotocol: seps/2575-stateless-mcp.md

particularly between the exchange of capabilities and a mandatory connection
lifecycle.

This proposal is to **remove the initialization handshake** and "unbundle"
its functions into discrete, stateless components. We will provide new, more
clearly defined mechanisms for clients and servers to exchange this information
without a mandatory state-creating cycle.

> **Note:** Session management (both transport-level and application-level) is
> addressed separately by
> [SEP-2322](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/modelcontextprotocol/pull/2322)
> and
> [SEP-2567](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/modelcontextprotocol/pull/2567).
> This SEP focuses exclusively on removing the initialization handshake and
> providing stateless alternatives for version negotiation, discovery, and
> capabilities.

### Protocol Version

To make requests self-contained, metadata previously negotiated during the
handshake must now be included with **every request**.

#### HTTP

For the HTTP transport, protocol version MUST be passed as **HTTP header**. For
the HTTP transport, the headers MUST be treated as the source of truth over the

> request payload.

Reviewer: Nitpick: this wording still doesn't sit quite right with me.  Philosophically, I would consider the payload to be the source of truth (the "origin" of information).

Furthermore, though, we are requiring (via "MUST") that the payload and the HTTP headers match.  Therefore, designating the HTTP headers as the source of truth seems unnecessary at best.

- `MCP-Protocol-Version: 2025-06-18`
  - **Purpose**: To inform the server which version of the MCP specification
    the client is using for this specific request.
  - **Requirement**: This header is **MANDATORY**. Servers should reject
    requests with a missing or unsupported version.
  - This header MUST match the value provided in the Request as specified
    below.

#### Per-request Version

The `protocol-version` MUST be embedded directly within the `_meta` field of the
request payload. For HTTP, this \_meta MUST match the associated HTTP header, or
else the server should return a 400 Bad Request.

The following diff illustrates the required changes to the `Request` interface:

```ts
export interface Request {
   method: string;
   params?: {
     /**
      * See [General fields: `_meta`](/specification/2025-06-18/basic/index#meta) for notes on `_meta` usage.
      */
     _meta?: {
+       /**
+        * The MCP Protocol Version being used for this request.
+        */

> +       "modelcontextprotocol.io/mcpProtocolVersion": string;

Reviewer: There have been some changes to `schema.ts` since #1442 was drafted.  In short, instead of defining the property in `Request`, we can just put it in `RequestMetaObject`: 

https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/modelcontextprotocol/blob/76775c6a412ad08bd32344db231268cde1f1bc4e/schema/draft/schema.ts#L62-L74

Author: Thanks for flagging. Updated.

    // ... other meta fields
  };
  // ...
}
```

##### Client-Initiated Streaming (Background Streaming)

This model applies when a client wants to proactively open a persistent SSE
stream to receive multiple or unsolicited events.

This is achieved using a dedicated `messages/listen` RPC. For the HTTP
transport, the client sends this request via `POST`, and the server's response
is an open SSE stream, with a `MessagesListenNotification` sent as the first
event. For the STDIO transport, this RPC is used for a simple request/response
capabilities check. This RPC replaces the existing GET endpoint behavior for
Streamable HTTP today.

**Request Schema:**

```ts
export interface MessagesListenRequest extends Request {
  method: "messages/listen";
  params: {
    _meta?: {
      "modelcontextprotocol.io/mcpProtocolVersion": string;
      "modelcontextprotocol.io/clientCapabilities"?: ClientCapabilities;
      "modelcontextprotocol.io/roots"?: Root[];
      // ... other meta fields
    };
  };
}
```

**Acknowledgment Notification:**

The server sends this notification as the first event on the stream to
acknowledge that the listen stream has been established. For HTTP, this is the

> first SSE event. The stream remains open for subsequent server-to-client

Reviewer: Since [SEP-1699](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/modelcontextprotocol/issues/1699), it won't necessarily be the first SSE event, though it could be.  In either case, the client can use the event ID to resume the SSE stream.

Author: I'm fuzzy on why we added this ack in the first place. Did we draft it before 1699 was merged?

Do we still need the ack if we're already sending an empty event? Would it be better to use this explict ack instead of the empty one mentioned in 1699?

messages until the server sends a final `Result` to close it.

```ts
export interface MessagesListenNotification extends Notification {
  method: "notifications/messages/listen";
}

> ```

Reviewer: Does the server ever send a JSON response for `MessagesListenRequest`?  (I can't remember where we landed on that. 😅 )

Author: Not sure I follow. Isn't the "notifications/listen/acknowledged" the response?

Reviewer: It is a response in the sense that it is sent by the server, but it is not a JSON-RPC response.  So I was wondering if the `messages/listen` JSON-RPC request ever gets a JSON-RPC response.

#### STDIO Transport Behavior

For STDIO, a client **MAY** send a `MessagesListenRequest` at any time to
declare its capabilities and the messages it is interested in receiving. The
server **MUST** acknowledge it by sending a `MessagesListenNotification`.

The server **MAY** then send server-to-client messages and notifications for
the duration of the connection. If the connection is terminated (e.g., the
server crashes and restarts), the client **MUST** re-send `MessagesListenRequest`
to re-establish its declared capabilities.

#### Streamable HTTP Transport Behavior

For HTTP, there are two distinct models for handling streaming:

**1. Server-Initiated Streaming**

To receive a streaming response for a single RPC call, the client **augments the
standard request** by including the `clientCapabilities` object in the `_meta`
field. The server **MAY** then respond with an SSE stream for that transaction.

**2. Client-Initiated Streaming**

To proactively open a persistent SSE stream, the client sends the dedicated
`MessagesListenRequest` via `POST`. The server's response **is an open SSE
stream** (`Content-Type: text/event-stream`), and the **first request** on this

> stream **MUST** be an event containing the `MessagesListenNotification`.

Reviewer: Maybe something like:

```suggestion
`MessagesListenRequest` via `POST`. The server's response **is an open SSE
stream** (`Content-Type: text/event-stream`), and the first JSON-RPC message on this
stream **MUST** be a `MessagesListenNotification`.
```

initialization phase, the specification creates an implied link between them,
particularly between the exchange of capabilities and a mandatory connection
lifecycle.

This proposal is to **remove the initialization handshake** and "unbundle"
its functions into discrete, stateless components. We will provide new, more
clearly defined mechanisms for clients and servers to exchange this information
without a mandatory state-creating cycle.

> **Note:** Session management (both transport-level and application-level) is
> addressed separately by
> [SEP-2322](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/modelcontextprotocol/pull/2322)
> and
> [SEP-2567](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/modelcontextprotocol/pull/2567).
> This SEP focuses exclusively on removing the initialization handshake and
> providing stateless alternatives for version negotiation, discovery, and
> capabilities.

### Protocol Version

To make requests self-contained, metadata previously negotiated during the
handshake must now be included with **every request**.

#### HTTP

For the HTTP transport, protocol version MUST be passed as **HTTP header**. For

> the HTTP transport, the headers MUST be treated as the source of truth over the

Reviewer 2: The wording of the headers MUST be treated as the source of truth over the request payload is confusing. It implies they can be different, but the section below and SEP-2243: HTTP Standardization require them to match otherwise its a bad request.

Suggest rewording or removing this line.

request payload.

- `MCP-Protocol-Version: 2025-06-18`
  - **Purpose**: To inform the server which version of the MCP specification
    the client is using for this specific request.
  - **Requirement**: This header is **MANDATORY**. Servers should reject
    requests with a missing or unsupported version.
  - This header MUST match the value provided in the Request as specified
    below.

#### Per-request Version

The `protocol-version` MUST be embedded directly within the `_meta` field of the
request payload. For HTTP, this \_meta MUST match the associated HTTP header, or
else the server should return a 400 Bad Request.

The following diff illustrates the required changes to `RequestMetaObject`:

```ts
export interface RequestMetaObject extends MetaObject {
  progressToken?: ProgressToken;
+ /**
+  * The MCP Protocol Version being used for this request.
+  */

> + "io.modelcontextprotocol/protocolVersion": string;

Reviewer 3: missing roots and logLevel here (that are mentioned later in prose)

> }

Reviewer 4: I wonder if we are overloading `_meta` here over time. Would we ever add any top level field anymore or shove everything into meta? For me the distinction might be more along the lines of what is a required field by the protocol vs what is an optional field or something provided by an extension. I can't fully point my finger at it, but it feels more right to me, to have a top `protocolVersion` field instead.

Author: I think we started with a top-level field, and there was some feedback that we should use _meta instead because of [this line in the spec](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/2025-06-18/basic/index#_meta):

> Additionally, definitions in the [schema](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/specification/blob/main/schema/2025-06-18/schema.ts) may reserve particular names for purpose-specific metadata, as declared in those definitions.

Is protocolVersion the only field you think makes sense at the top level? Or should the others be as well?

```

#### Unsupported Protocol Versions

> If a server receives a request with an unsupported protocol version, it MUST

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If a server receives a request with a protocol version it does not support, it MUST
```
Nit: but clarifying as the way it's written could be interpreted as a client sends an unknown protocol version like draft, or an experimental one. if the client and server agree this exists protocol negotiation should work.

return a JSON-RPC error response. For HTTP, the response status code MUST be
`400 Bad Request`. The error MUST conform to the following structure:

```ts

> export const UNSUPPORTED_PROTOCOL_VERSION = -32001;

Reviewer 3: This is already defined as `-32602` in https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/2025-11-25/basic/lifecycle#error-handling

Author: Interesting. It's not in the schema. I will update to match the example.

export interface UnsupportedProtocolVersionError extends Omit<
  JSONRPCErrorResponse,
  "error"
> {
  error: Error & {
    code: typeof UNSUPPORTED_PROTOCOL_VERSION;
    data: {
      /**
       * An array of protocol version strings that the server supports.
       */
      supportedVersions: string[];
    };
  };
}
```

#### Version Negotiation Flow

Without an initialization handshake, version negotiation happens inline:

1. The client sends a request with its preferred protocol version in the
   `MCP-Protocol-Version` header and
   `io.modelcontextprotocol/protocolVersion` `_meta` field.
2. If the server supports that version, it processes the request normally.
3. If the server does not support the requested version, it returns an

>    `UnsupportedVersionError` containing its list of `supportedVersions`.

Reviewer 3: This was defined as `UnsupportedProtocolVersionError` earlier
```suggestion
   `UnsupportedProtocolVersionError` containing its list of `supportedVersions`.
```

4. The client selects a mutually supported version from the list and retries.

Alternatively, a client **MAY** call `server/discover` first to learn the
server's supported versions before sending any other requests.

### Optional Discovery for Server Capabilities

To allow clients to adapt to different server implementations, this
specification introduces a **discovery RPC**. This provides a standard mechanism

> for a server to advertise its supported protocol versions and capabilities.

Reviewer 4: I wonder a bit if this overlaps somewhat with the MCP Server Card, and we could serve the same here?

Author: I think we previously discussed this having overlap with the Server Card, but not finalizing what to do about it. They seem to me like they are just different enough it's useful to include both. 

From the perspective of `.wellknown` and not requiring auth is useful for HTTP, but from the perspective of a unified interface for STDIO/HTTP keeping an RPC is useful. We can align on the content if that's needed.

Author: Added to FAQ.

> This discovery step is **OPTIONAL**. A client is free to invoke any RPC without

Reviewer 2: Can we clarify this I think we want to say

Servers MUST implement the discovery rpc 
Clients MAY call it. 

The server part is not optional right? Not totally clear from the language

first calling the discovery endpoint. If a client calls an unsupported RPC, the
server **MUST** return a `Method not found` JSON-RPC error (`-32601`). For HTTP,

> the response status code MUST be `404 Not Found`.

Reviewer 3: Problem: 9/10 official SDKs return 200 here (and Go returns 400 with a plain-text body...).

I don't think we can change this, and should instead specify 200 as correct.

Author: I think the right move is to align the spec on HTTP-layer error signaling rather than codify the 200 behavior. It's better to change this now, and evaluate additional holistic changes in the next revision to make this consistent.

Here's a non-exhaustive list of other HTTP codes we are supposed to be returning:

  - 400 Bad Request for rejected JSON-RPC notifications/responses
  - 400 Bad Request for missing MCP-Session-Id header
  - 404 Not Found for terminated sessions
  - 400 Bad Request for invalid or unsupported MCP-Protocol-Version 
  - 400 Bad Request for header validation failures 
  - 400 Bad Request with -32001 HeaderMismatch for header/body mismatches 
  - Clients handle 400 Bad Request, 404 Not Found, 405 Method Not Allowed during transport detection 

I think the HTTP error is the right behavior:                                                                                                         
  1. **HTTP-layer visibility:** Returning 200 with an embedded error hides protocol errors from proxies, load balancers, alerting systems, caches, browser devtools, and curl. A 404 triggers normal HTTP error handling; a 200 looks like success to everything that doesn't parse the body.
  2. **Spec consistency:** Using 404 for Method not found and 400 for other protocol-level errors is consistent with all the examples above.
  3. **Specifying resolves fragmentation:** 9/10 SDKs returning 200 while Go returns 400 with plain text is exactly the kind of inconsistency the spec should resolve
  4. **This SEP is already a major change:** SDKs will need updates anyway; getting it right now is less complicated then trying to do it after initialize is removed.

#### `server/discover` RPC

- **Purpose**: To allow a client to query the server for its supported
  protocol versions, capabilities, and other metadata.

**Request Schema:**

```ts

> export interface DiscoveryRequest extends Request {

Reviewer 3: nit: should this be `DiscoverRequest` to match the method name? (same for `Result`)

  method: "server/discover";
  params?: {};
}
```

**Response Schema:**

```ts

> export interface DiscoveryResult extends Result {

Reviewer 3: We have a bit of a bootstrap problem here. Does this requests ALSO return an error if the version the client sends is not supported? If the purpose (in part) of this request is to discover protocol versions then it may require special wording. Example: if a client is on 2026-06-xx and a server only supports 2027-xx-xx, is that an error, or do you get a response (that you may not be able to understand)? 

There's further complexity here: what capabilities (etc.) do you return if the server supports different capability sets depending on the version?

What I'd recommend:
* We should _remove_ `supportedVersions` from this.
* Make it an error (as per usual) if the client provides an unsupported version (and server responds with supported versions in the error)
* That means you have a well-defined version for this response and can return appropriate capabilities.

Author: I don't think there is a bootstrap problem. 

The expected workflow isn't server/discover first, then call something else. It's: just call the capability you need. If the server doesn't support it, you get an error back. server/discover is an optional convenience for clients that want to query the server's surface up-front, not a required preamble.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
   
The Protocol Version section already covers this. Protocol version is sent on every request — including server/discover. The Version Negotiation Flow already specifies what happens when a server doesn't support the requested version: it returns UnsupportedProtocolVersionError with the supported versions in the error data. So if a client calls server/discover with a version the server doesn't support, the client already gets back the supported versions through the normal error path.

  /**
   * A list of MCP Protocol Version strings that this server supports.
   * The client should choose a version from this list for use in
   * subsequent requests.
   */
  supportedVersions: string[];

  /**
   * An object detailing the capabilities of the server.
   */
  capabilities: ServerCapabilities;

  /**
   * Information about the server software implementation.
   */
  serverInfo: Implementation;

  /**
   * Natural language instructions describing how to use the server and
   * its features. This can be used by clients to improve an LLM's
   * understanding of available tools (e.g., by including it in a system prompt).
   */

>   instructions?: string;

Reviewer 4: are we happy with the name `instructions`? I always felt it is quite awkward but never came up with something better.

Reviewer 3: It's not great, but not terrible, and it's already a thing so we should probably just keep it as-is to avoid needless churn?

}
```

### Per-Request Client Capabilities

To complete the decoupling from the initial handshake, client capabilities are

> no longer negotiated once at initialization. Instead, a client **MAY** specify its

Reviewer 2: Doesn't this need to be MUST otherwise how will the server know how to respond?

If they support no extra capabilities then they don't send any but I think they have to specify them for this to work. It's not optional right?

capabilities on a per-request basis. This allows the server to know what
optional features the client can handle for a specific transaction, such as

> streaming responses.

Reviewer 4: I feel the *MAY* here is very restrictive. It means nobody can rely on it, and it's as good as not specifying it. I feel we should be stronger here. Either they must or they must not. In the absence of clear guidance we rely on SDK authors to come up with whatever they feel is best.

Reviewer 2: +1 I think this needs to be MUST otherwise I'm not sure how servers handle this. If a client doesn't have any capabilities then they don't specify it.

> A server **SHOULD** only send requests that match a client's provided

Reviewer 2: We need to update the wording here with MRTR.

The existing client capabilities of experimental, roots, sampling, elicitation are all moving to MRTR, so this sending notifications on an SSE stream doesn't totally makes sense to me.

There is no Client Capability for I want notifications right? so this example is confusing. Those are Server Capabilities of I'll send you a List Tools Notification.

capabilities. The server may send these requests in two ways:

1. **Inline**: As notifications within an SSE stream response to a triggering
   RPC (e.g., `notifications/progress` within a `tools/call` response stream).
2. **On the listen stream**: As events on an open `notifications/listen` SSE stream.

In both cases, the server uses the `clientCapabilities` from the request's
`_meta` to determine what it is allowed to send.

> If a server sends a request that erroneously calls a client capability it

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure how this works, what method is the client returning this error on to a server-initiated request? With MRTR & Task Standardization most ClientResults will be removed, the only one remaining is PingRequest. 

Example: 
Client sends message tools/call with no additional capabilities
Server responds with IncompleteResult Message asking for an Elicitation

The only thing the client can do is ignore elicitation and fail the tool call.

doesn't support, a client MUST return a `Method not found` JSON-RPC error
(`-32601`).

If a server requires client capabilities to process a request and the client

> has not provided them, the server MUST return a JSON-RPC error. For HTTP, the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
has not provided them, the server MUST return a JSON-RPC error, which specifies the missing capabilities. For HTTP, the
```

response status code MUST be `400 Bad Request`. The client MAY then retry the
request with the required capabilities in `_meta`.

```ts
export const MISSING_REQUIRED_CLIENT_CAPABILITY = -32003;

export interface MissingRequiredClientCapabilityError extends Omit<
  JSONRPCErrorResponse,
  "error"
> {
  error: Error & {
    code: typeof MISSING_REQUIRED_CLIENT_CAPABILITY;
    data: {
      /**
       * The capabilities the server requires from the client
       * to process this request.
       */
      requiredCapabilities: ClientCapabilities;
    };
  };
}
```

In addition to `clientCapabilities`, the following fields previously exchanged

> during initialization **MAY** be included in per-request `_meta` fields:

Reviewer 3: We should explicitly say that `roots/list` and `logging/setLevel` are just gone.

- `"io.modelcontextprotocol/clientInfo"`: `Implementation` — identifies the
  client software without requiring an initialization handshake.
- `"io.modelcontextprotocol/roots"`: `Root[]` — the client's current root
  URIs, replacing the need for `notifications/roots/list_changed`.
- `"io.modelcontextprotocol/logLevel"`: `LoggingLevel` — the desired log

>   level for this request, replacing the `logging/setLevel` RPC.

Reviewer 4: We should be explicitly defining what it means if they are absent , or require them to be set at all times.

Reviewer 2: +1 I think we need to be more explicit here.

If loglevel isn't present we should assume some kind of default

I think some subset of clientInfo should be required notably name and version.

Does Roots need to be included here since MRTR provides a mechanism for them to be requested?

Author: > If loglevel isn't present we should assume some kind of default

I've updated to say that logLevel not being specified = no logging messages.

clientInfo is now required, like it was on init. 

Roots is removed because of MRTR. (Although I wonder if that's better than sending it per request)

The primary capability defined in this proposal is the ability to handle
streaming responses, which is supported through two distinct models:
server-initiated and client-initiated.

#### Streaming Models

> ##### Server-Initiated Streaming (Response Stream)

Reviewer 2: I don't think I follow this use case? isn't this just the normal request client -> server request path specified above?

What does this have to do with whether the server responds with an SSE stream?

Author: I tried to rewrite this entire section to be more clear and specify interaction with MRTR  explicitly.

This model applies when a client makes a standard RPC call and the server
responds back with an SSE stream. The client specifies supported capabilities
directly in the request.

The client adds an optional `clientCapabilities` field to `RequestMetaObject`.
For the HTTP transport, a server that supports this **MAY** then respond with
an SSE stream for that transaction.

```ts
export interface RequestMetaObject extends MetaObject {
  progressToken?: ProgressToken;
  "io.modelcontextprotocol/protocolVersion": string;
+ /**
+  * Optional capabilities of the client for this specific request.
+  */
+ "io.modelcontextprotocol/clientCapabilities"?: ClientCapabilities;
}
```

##### Client-Initiated Streaming (Background Streaming)

> This model applies when a client wants to proactively open a persistent SSE

Reviewer 2: Is this stream resumable? Can we call this out here? What stream durability support are we guarantee-ing here. If a client subscribes to notifications, but then the connection breaks and a notification misses being sent, does the server have to queue this and wait for the client to reconnect? how is it doing that?

The above questions are pretty complex, and imply the server must store some state, so I'd recommend that without sessions we do not support this stream being resumable this is an optimization for the server to deliver push notifications to the client where appropriate.  If the connection breaks the client has other methods of obtaining updates like calling tools/list etc...

Reviewer 5: Resumable streams requires some kind of session/state. It's incompatible with "stateless".

Author: There are SSE resume mechanics here (that technically function without sessions) that this SEP doesn't touch: https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/2025-11-25/basic/transports#resumability-and-redelivery

They are optional for the server (they don't have to return an ID), so I don't think there's harm in continuing it.

stream to receive multiple or unsolicited events.

This is achieved using a dedicated `notifications/listen` RPC. For the HTTP
transport, the client sends this request via `POST`, and the server's response
is an open SSE stream, with a `NotificationsListenNotification` sent as the
first event. For the STDIO transport, this RPC is used to declare the client's
capabilities and interests.

This RPC replaces the existing HTTP GET endpoint for Streamable HTTP. The GET
endpoint is removed; all communication uses POST. Only notifications (not

> requests) may be sent on the listen stream, per

Reviewer 3: Should make explicit: is PingRequest going away here?

Author: removed.

[SEP-2260](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/modelcontextprotocol/pull/2260).

**Request Schema:**

```ts
export interface NotificationsListenRequest extends Request {

>   method: "notifications/listen";

Reviewer 3: I don't want to bikeshed on names, but as a technicality I don't think we should have a request under the `notifications/` method  "namespace" since clients/servers may special case it. In fact, Go already does: https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/go-sdk/blob/4c00594be629ca87637f4316a232377f9b0979cd/mcp/shared.go#L107-L109

Recommend `listen/notifications` if you really want to keep it. Honestly I'm happy with anything except `notifications/*`.

Reviewer 6: it's a bit unfortunate because `notifications/listen` does map cleanly to `tools/list` noun-verb ordering.

if we're saying `notifications/*` are always nouns, it could make sense to have a separate entity called `subscriptions`.

So subscription would be `subscriptions/create` with the particular notifications you want to receive. That would imply you could subscribe to non-notifications. @pja-ant  would that fit in with triggers at all? or is there generally naming collisions to be mindful with that?

Reviewer 3: As long as we stay away from `events` or `triggers` or `channels` I think we should be ok :)  I don't mind beyond that.

Author: I updated to use subscriptions/listen ? create seems a bit odd since it's ephemeral

  params: {
    _meta?: {
      "io.modelcontextprotocol/protocolVersion": string;
      "io.modelcontextprotocol/clientCapabilities"?: ClientCapabilities;

>       "io.modelcontextprotocol/roots"?: Root[];

Reviewer 2: why would you send roots on this request?

      // ... other meta fields
    };

    /**
     * Optional filter for which notifications the client wants to receive.
     * If omitted, the server SHOULD send all notifications the client's
     * capabilities support.
     */

>     notifications?: {

Reviewer 2: what about the following notifications?
- cancelled notifications -> i think these don't make sense without sessions
- progress notifications -> without sessions I think these need to only be available on tool calls, are there any other methods we need to scope this down to?
- Logging Message Notifications -> I think these need to be here as long as we are supporting them. 
- Task status notifications -> recommend we restrict these only to the task methods, without a session no way to associate this.

Author: > cancelled notifications -> i think these don't make sense without sessions

I actually think they don't make sense post-MRTR. Should we update that SEP to reflect they are removed? 

> progress notifications -> without sessions I think these need to only be available on tool calls

Post-SEP-2260, I think they are restricted to responses to requests.

> Logging Message Notifications -> I think these need to be here as long as we are supporting them.

Updated to be included.

> Logging Message Notifications -> I think these need to be here as long as we are supporting them.

SGTM. Should we update that in the tasks SEP?

      /**
       * If true, receive notifications/tools/list_changed.
       */
      toolsListChanged?: boolean;

      /**
       * If true, receive notifications/prompts/list_changed.
       */
      promptsListChanged?: boolean;

      /**
       * If true, receive notifications/resources/list_changed.
       */
      resourcesListChanged?: boolean;

      /**
       * Subscribe to notifications/resources/updated for specific
       * resource URIs. Replaces the resources/subscribe RPC.
       */
      resourceSubscriptions?: string[];
    };
  };
}
```

> If `notifications` is omitted entirely, the server **SHOULD** send all

Reviewer 2: What does this mean? the client doesn't declare support for listChange notifications the server does. 

None of the notifications correspond to client capabilities in lieu of MRTR so this wording is confusing.

Author: LogLevel does -- but I've updated to be explicit that it should be included in the body.

notifications the client's declared capabilities support. If provided, only
the specified notification types are delivered.

**Acknowledgment Notification:**

The server sends this notification as the first event on the stream to
acknowledge that the listen stream has been established. For HTTP, this is the
first SSE event. The stream remains open for subsequent server-to-client
messages until the server sends a final `Result` to close it.

```ts

> export interface NotificationsListenNotification extends Notification {

Reviewer 2: I think you should include the list of notifications the server is agreeing to send here.

At the subscription point the client may not know what capabilities the server supports (tools, prompts, resources, list change) because Discover is optional. So it may attempt to subscribe to things that the server doesn't support.

To fully close the loop here I think this message needs to contain what the server has agreed to send notifications for explicitly. That or you need to return an error from the Server if the client attempts to subscribe to an unsupported capability.

Scenario:
Client -> subscribe to promptsListChanged
Server -> doesn't support Prompts, 
so what happens?

  method: "notifications/listen/acknowledged";
}
```

#### STDIO Transport Behavior

For STDIO, a client **MAY** send a `NotificationsListenRequest` at any time to
declare its capabilities and the messages it is interested in receiving. The
server **MUST** acknowledge it by sending a `NotificationsListenNotification`.

> The server **MAY** then send server-to-client messages and notifications for

Reviewer 2: So if the Client never sends NotificationListenRequest the Server MUST NOT send notifications? Is that the intended behavior?

This would be symmetric with HTTP Transport where the client is subscribing to the various notifications.

Author: Yes. Updated to clearly reflect that for both http and stdio.

#### Streamable HTTP Transport Behavior

For HTTP, there are two distinct models for handling streaming:

**1. Server-Initiated Streaming**

To receive a streaming response for a single RPC call, the client **augments the
standard request** by including the `clientCapabilities` object in the `_meta`
field. The server **MAY** then respond with an SSE stream for that transaction.

**2. Client-Initiated Streaming**

To proactively open a persistent SSE stream, the client sends the dedicated
`NotificationsListenRequest` via `POST`. The server's response **is an open SSE
stream** (`Content-Type: text/event-stream`), and the first JSON-RPC message on
this stream **MUST** be a `NotificationsListenNotification`.

### Deprecated and Removed RPCs

To simplify the protocol and align with the move to per-request capabilities,
the following RPC methods and notifications are removed:

- `initialize` / `notifications/initialized`: The initialization handshake is
  removed. Version negotiation is handled per-request via
  `MCP-Protocol-Version` headers and `_meta` fields. Capability discovery is
  handled by `server/discover`. Servers compliant with this SEP **SHOULD**

>   accept and ignore `notifications/initialized` without error to maintain

Reviewer 2: what's the scenario where notifications/initialized gets sent without initialize happening? This is a fundamentally breaking change. 

Clients can support multiple protocol versions and perform initialize for old versions, but new servers can't connect to old clients that expect initialize and capability negotiation right?

Author: Removed this sentence to avoid implying the server can't support other versions of the protocol.

  backward compatibility with clients that may send it.
- `logging/setLevel`: This method is removed. Log levels should now be
  specified on a per-request basis using the
  `'io.modelcontextprotocol/logLevel'` field in the `_meta` object.

> - `notifications/roots/list_changed`: This notification is removed. Clients

Reviewer 2: I think we should get rid of this notification but its because MRTR provides the server a way to ask for it per request.

Providing Root updates outside of a specific request, without sessions, doesn't really make sense right? Or is there a scenario i'm missing

  method: "server/discover";
  params?: {};
}
```

**Response Schema:**

```ts
export interface DiscoverResult extends Result {
  /**
   * A list of MCP Protocol Version strings that this server supports.
   * The client should choose a version from this list for use in
   * subsequent requests.
   */
  supportedVersions: string[];

  /**
   * An object detailing the capabilities of the server.
   */
  capabilities: ServerCapabilities;

  /**
   * Information about the server software implementation.
   */
  serverInfo: Implementation;

  /**
   * Natural language instructions describing how to use the server and
   * its features. This can be used by clients to improve an LLM's
   * understanding of available tools (e.g., by including it in a system prompt).
   */
  instructions?: string;
}
```

### Per-Request Client Capabilities

To complete the decoupling from the initial handshake, client capabilities are
no longer negotiated once at initialization. Instead, a client **MUST** specify
its capabilities on every request. This ensures the server is always fully
informed about what optional features the client can handle for that specific

> transaction. An absent or empty capabilities object means the client supports no

Reviewer 3: L311-312 says that `clientCapabilities` are required, so "absent" is not a valid option.

export interface MissingRequiredClientCapabilityError extends Omit<
  JSONRPCErrorResponse,
  "error"
> {
  error: Error & {
    code: typeof MISSING_REQUIRED_CLIENT_CAPABILITY;
    data: {
      /**
       * The capabilities the server requires from the client
       * to process this request.
       */
      requiredCapabilities: ClientCapabilities;
    };
  };
}
```

### `subscriptions/listen` RPC

This SEP introduces a new `subscriptions/listen` RPC that replaces the previous
HTTP GET endpoint and ensures consistent behavior between HTTP and STDIO. A
client uses it to open a long-lived channel for receiving notifications outside
the context of a specific request.

The HTTP GET endpoint used by Streamable HTTP for server-to-client messages is
**removed** in this version of the protocol. All communication uses POST.

Per [SEP-2260][SEP-2260], only notifications (not requests) flow on this
channel; server-initiated requests use MRTR (see Response Streaming above) and
are scoped to a specific client request.

#### Request Schema

```ts
export interface SubscriptionsListenRequest extends Request {
  method: "subscriptions/listen";
  params: {

>     _meta?: {

Reviewer 3: These meta fields are not optional, so _meta cannot be optional
```suggestion
    _meta: {
```

     * Each notification type is opt-in; the server **MUST NOT** send
     * notification types the client has not explicitly requested here.
     */
    notifications: {
      /**
       * If true, receive notifications/tools/list_changed.
       */
      toolsListChanged?: boolean;

      /**
       * If true, receive notifications/prompts/list_changed.
       */
      promptsListChanged?: boolean;

      /**
       * If true, receive notifications/resources/list_changed.
       */
      resourcesListChanged?: boolean;

      /**
       * Subscribe to notifications/resources/updated for specific
       * resource URIs. Replaces the resources/subscribe RPC.
       */
      resourceSubscriptions?: string[];

      /**
       * If set, receive notifications/message at or above this level.
       * If absent, no log messages are sent on this stream.
       */
      logLevel?: LoggingLevel;
    };
  };
}
```

The `notifications` field is **required** and the client **MUST** explicitly
opt in to each notification type it wants to receive. If a field within
`notifications` is omitted (or set to `false`), the server **MUST NOT** send
notifications of that type.

> 

Reviewer 2: Do we need to add any kind of language here about what happens if the connection closes unexpectedly.

My assumption is we aren't doing some kind of resumable stream since there is no session any more. Might be worth calling out that the expectation here around this.

For example, consider the sequence of events:
1. Client calls Tools/List -> gets tools list
2. Tools List Change happens on the server
3. Client calls subscriptions/listen to subscribe to tool list chaneg notifications.

My expectation is the client would not see the tools list change notification. Since this endpoint only supports notifications that are generated after its established.

Author: Removed resumable streams.

#### Acknowledgment Notification

The server sends this notification as the first event on the stream to
acknowledge that the listen stream has been established. For HTTP, this is the
first SSE event. The stream remains open for subsequent server-to-client

> messages until the server sends a final `Result` to close it.

Reviewer 2: What kind of Result would a server send on this notification only stream?

My assumption here is that this stream will remain open until an HTTP time out is reached in HTTP or until the Process is killed in Stdio. Do we need something more formal than tie-ing it to the connection lifecycle?

```ts
export interface SubscriptionsAcknowledgedNotification extends Notification {
  method: "notifications/subscriptions/acknowledged";
  params: {
    /**
     * The notification subscriptions the server has agreed to honor.
     * Only includes notification types the server actually supports.
     * If the client requested an unsupported notification type
     * (e.g., promptsListChanged when the server has no prompts),
     * it is omitted from this set.
     */
    notifications: {
      toolsListChanged?: boolean;
      promptsListChanged?: boolean;
      resourcesListChanged?: boolean;
      resourceSubscriptions?: string[];
      logLevel?: LoggingLevel;
    };
  };
}
```

#### Transport Behavior

**HTTP.** The client sends `SubscriptionsListenRequest` via `POST`. The server's
response is an open SSE stream (`Content-Type: text/event-stream`), and the
first JSON-RPC message on this stream **MUST** be a
`SubscriptionsAcknowledgedNotification`.

> **STDIO.** The client sends `SubscriptionsListenRequest` at any time. The server

Reviewer 3: How does a STDIO client stop listening? `notifications/cancelled`?

Similarly, if a client sends two listen requests over stdio (perhaps with different notifications and/or capabilities), what are the semantics?

Author: Updated with the discussed stdio semantics.

- `initialize` / `notifications/initialized`: The initialization handshake is
  removed. Version negotiation is handled per-request via `MCP-Protocol-Version`
  headers and `_meta` fields. Capability discovery is handled by
  `server/discover`.
- `logging/setLevel`: Removed. The log level is now specified per-request via
  the `'io.modelcontextprotocol/logLevel'` `_meta` field. There is no
  replacement RPC.
- `roots/list`: Removed as a top-level server-to-client RPC. Servers that need
  the client's roots **MUST** request them via the MRTR `ListRootsRequest`
  mechanism (see SEP-2322).
- `notifications/roots/list_changed`: Removed. Roots are fetched on demand via
  MRTR, so there is no need for a change notification.
- `resources/subscribe` / `resources/unsubscribe`: These methods are removed.
  Resource subscriptions are inherently stateful — the server must remember
  which resources each client has subscribed to. Instead, clients declare the
  resources they want updates for in the `notifications` param of the
  `subscriptions/listen` request. The server sends
  `notifications/resources/updated` on the listen stream for matching resources.

> - `ping`: Removed. With independent server-to-client requests eliminated,

Reviewer 2: Are we removing ping as a client->server method too? I'm totally fine with that just wanted to clarify since the text talks about the server-to-client requests not being needed.

Author: Clarified we're removing both.

the future.

## Backward Compatibility

While this proposal attempts to preserve existing functionality and use-cases,
this proposal introduces a **fundamental, backward-incompatible change**. Thus,
it will require a new version of the protocol.

### Supporting Multiple Versions

While this SEP removes the `initialize` handshake, a server that wishes to
support both old and new clients **MAY** do so. Such a server can continue to
implement the old `initialize` RPC to handle legacy clients, while also exposing
the new stateless RPCs (`server/discover`, etc.) for updated clients.

Both servers and clients should be able to handle changes in the versions
appropriately. Two example scenarios are outlined below, where vPrev indicates
the version prior to the SEP, and vAfter indicates a version after it.

#### Client (supporting vPrev) → Server (vPrev, vPost)

1. Client sends initialization
2. Server supports vPrev, so initialization is returned per spec
3. Client and server communicate per `vPrev`.

#### Client (supporting vPrev, vPost) → Server (vPrev)

1. Client sends a request (e.g. tools/list) with MCP Protocol Version header

>    1. HTTP: Server says "400 bad request"

Reviewer 3: How does the client disambiguate between different sources of 400s from the server?

>    2. STDIO: returns error indicating initialization was required

Reviewer 3: What is the error specifically?

request payload. For HTTP, this \_meta MUST match the associated HTTP header, or
else the server should return a 400 Bad Request.

The following diff illustrates the required changes to `RequestMetaObject`:

```ts
export interface RequestMetaObject extends MetaObject {
  progressToken?: ProgressToken;
+ /**
+  * The MCP Protocol Version being used for this request.
+  */
+ "io.modelcontextprotocol/protocolVersion": string;
  // Additional per-request fields (clientInfo, clientCapabilities, logLevel)
  // are introduced in the Per-Request Client Capabilities section below.
}
```

#### Unsupported Protocol Versions

If a server receives a request with a protocol version it does not implement
(whether the version is unknown to the server or is a known version the server
has chosen not to support, such as an experimental or draft version), it MUST
return a JSON-RPC error response. For HTTP, the response status code MUST be
`400 Bad Request`. The error MUST conform to the following structure:

```ts
export interface UnsupportedProtocolVersionError extends Omit<
  JSONRPCErrorResponse,
  "error"
> {
  error: Error & {

>     code: typeof INVALID_PARAMS;

Reviewer 7: I think we should introduce a new error code here similar to `MISSING_REQUIRED_CLIENT_CAPABILITY`, so that we can disambiguate from an arbitrary `INVALID_PARAMS`
